:toc: macro

= RFB 4: One-off Keyring Design

== Background

The Taho wallet allows users to both view data associated with an account
of theirs, and sign transactions on behalf of that account using private key
material. Users can set up new accounts rooted in fresh private key material,
and accounts can derive many addresses via derivation paths as specified in
BIP32.

To properly interact with key material, the wallet has an underlying
abstraction called the **keyring**. The abstraction was designed to be safe,
minimize the possibility to lose key material, and minimize the possibility of
exfiltrating key material unintentionally. Its structure is fully described in
RFB 1: Keyring Design.

The keyring service was designed to manage BIP32 compatible hierarchical
deterministic (HD) wallets defined by BIP39 mnemonics, including allowing for
the derivation of new addresses at the address index depth defined in BIP44's
multi-account hierarchy.

However, many Ethereum users (and some on L2s and other chains) don't use HD
wallets or mnemonics, opting instead to use one-off private keys that don't
directly support further address derivation. Users can choose to do this due to
having generated legacy private key wallets in the past and being locked into
their use, because their tool of choice for wallet generation deals in private
keys, or for security reasons to only import individual private keys while
maintaining control of the base mnemonic for secure derivation in a medium
other than their primary hot wallet.

Additionally, the original design of the keyring service did not expose private
key material to callers in any way. While more secure, this approach meant that
key material generated in the extension could never be extracted, leading to
concerns around data loss and lock-in.

== Proposal

=== Goal

The keyring service, originally focused on ``HDKeyring``s, should be expanded to
handle both HD wallets and private key-based key material. This key material
should support both primary source types for private key material: a raw hex
format, and the JSON Crowdsale and JSON Keystore format historically used by
various wallets and other key material sources.

Additionally, the service should provide the ability to export private key
material. In the case where an address's export is requested whose
corresponding key material was imported directly as a private key, the private
key should be exportable as such. In the case where the address was derived
from an underlying HDKeyring, the service should allow exporting the private
key corresponding to that particular address. Finally, the service should allow
direct export of the underlying mnemonic for HDKeyrings.

Note that the service will explicitly NOT support exporting any of the
historical JSON key formats, it will only allow for exporting the raw private
key.

=== Implementation

The existing service's functionality is decomposed into the service side and an
underlying library, `@tallycash/hd-keyring`, whose focus is entirely around
managing HDKeyring material. To support private key export, the hd-keyring package
must add export capabilities.

Additionally, the keyring service, which was primarily charged with dealing
with HDKeyring objects, will be renamed to `InternalSignerService`, to reflect
the fact that it is managing two different types of signers on behalf of the
extension: mnemonic-based keyrings and raw private keys.

The sections below cover changes to each.

==== Core Keyring

The hd-keyring package exports two primary constructs: the HDKeyring and the
SerializedHDKeyring. The HDKeyring is designed to maintain the privacy of all
sensitive data and only allow access through a defined interface. To this end,
it leverages ECMAScript private variables to ensure that callers cannot access
internal data through JavaScript escape hatches. The only way to access
mnemonic information is through the serialize function, which returns a
SerializedHDKeyring.

In addition to the hd-keyring package, Taho uses the Ethers library to manage
private-key-only signers.

None of this changes for the purposes of this RFB. Instead, the export
capabilities are layered on in the form of one new method, `exportPrivateKey`.
To make it clear that calling this method is dangerous, a static string is
required to be passed in asserting that the caller is aware the returned key
needs to be treated with care.

==== Service

===== Taho Services Abstraction

(This is a repeat of the same section provided in RFB 1.)

Taho services are runtime singletons that are charged with managing a
single slice of functionality for the extension. They manage data storage and
interactions with other services, as well as maintaining internal state.
Triggering a service’s functionality is currently done by invoking a method on
the service; for example, the KeyringService has an unlock method that is used
to unlock the extension’s current keyrings.

The service abstraction is intended to prevent leakage of the service’s
internal storage requirements, as well as to expose a clear availability
lifecycle for consumers. Generally, services can be created, during which phase
any asynchronous starting data such as storage and deserialization is resolved.
Once a service is created, it can be started and stopped. Currently services
can only walk through their lifecycle once, so once a service is stopped, it
can no longer be restarted.

Taho services communicate data outwards in two ways:

* All services have a set of events they may broadcast. These are expected to
  be viewable by any external entity, and should only carry public (to the rest
  of the extension) data.
* Service method calls may return data. This data is expected to only be
  viewable by the caller, though generally any outsider is expected to be able
  to call into the service. This means the restriction on returned data is
  effectively the same; namely, the caller should only receive sensitive data
  they have proven they have access to.

==== The `InternalSignerService`

`InternalSignerService` provides access to zero or more internal keyrings
(``HDKeyring``s from the core keyring package) and zero or more raw private
keys. It also persists these keys and keyrings when necessary and loads them
from storage at unlock time. The internal signer service can be locked or
unlocked. When unlocked, it has direct access to `HDKeyring` instances and
their data (including serialized mnemonics), as well as Ethers `Wallet`
instances and their data (including private keys) and mediates access to those
signers by the rest of the extension. When locked, the internal signer service
clears all references to keyrings and private keys.

`InternalSignerService` stores serialized keyrings encrypted by a key derived
from a user-specified password. Encryption is performed using the
browser-provided Web Crypto tools, and is designed to avoid hand-rolled
encryption. Both the key derivation from the password and the encryption of
serialized keyring data is performed using Web Crypto. Decryption is similarly
managed by Web Crypto. Previous audits have flagged that the PBKDF2 algorithm used
with Web Crypto would ideally be replaced by Argon2, but the resources to dig
into integrating a WebAssembly distribution of Argon2 have not been available
yet. Web Crypto is likely at least a year out and probably more from directly
supporting Argon2, unfortunately; see
https://github.com/WICG/proposals/issues/59 for the proposal that could add
this.

As with `HDKeyring`, `InternalSignerService` protects access to cached key
information and keyrings by using ECMAScript private variables so external
observers cannot use JavaScript features to read the data.

===== Importing and generating keys and keyrings

`InternalSignerService` only allows generating keyrings; private keys cannot be
generated directly, though they can be exported from keyring-derived addresses.

Private keys and keyrings can both be imported. In the event that a private key
is imported and corresponds to an address already controlled by a keyring, it
is not added as a separate private key, but instead the keyring is left to manage
that private key material.

Importing a keyring after a private key for one of its derived addresses has
been imported could result in dual tracking of the underlying key material: the
private key is managed explicitly, while the keyring itself can also derive the
relevant address's key. To keep account provenance clear, when a keyring is
used to derive an address that has an existing private key associated with it,
the private key is removed and the keyring is considered the canonical source
of the key.

Private key imports can be done with either a raw format or a JSON format. The
JSON format uses a password to encrypt the underlying data, while the raw
format is an unencrypted hex-encoded private key. In each case, an Ethers
`Wallet` instance is created and then added to the underlying private key
tracking variables.

NOTE:: In the case that an address X is, say, the 5th derived address of a
keyring, and is imported via an explicit private key, it will be managed by the
explicit private key unless and until the keyring has its 5th address derived
explicitly. Only when the 5th address derivation is explicitly requested will
the private key be removed. If the 5th address is already derived and the
private key is imported, the address will continue to be managed by the
keyring.

===== Exporting keys and mnemonics

`InternalSignerService` allows exporting both private keys and mnemonics. In
both cases, the export request is done by specifying the address whose material
is being requested.

If an export private key call is made for an address with explicit private key
material, that material is used. If an export private key call is made for an
address with no explicit private key material, the keyring's export is used.
Finally, if an export private key call is made with an address whose key
material or mnemonic is not known, nothing is returned.

For mnemonics, only an address that has an associated keyring can export a
mnemonic. An address with explicit private key underlying it will return
nothing.

The security expectations of the `InternalSignerService` are as follows:

* When locked, the service should have no access to key material.
* When unlocked, the service should permit unlimited access to signing
  requests.
* When unlocked, the service should never expose mnemonic or private key
  information, via method call or event, with the three exceptions below.
* When a new keyring is generated, the service should provide one-time access
  to the mnemonic to the caller of generateNewKeyring . This mnemonic should
  not be emitted in an event.
* When unlocked, the service should expose a mnemonic when the `exportMnemonic`
  method is called.
* When unlocked, the service should expose a private key when the
  `exportPrivateKey` method is called.
* No interaction with the keyring service should lead to the loss of
  previously-used key material. In particular, persisting keys should never
  override previously-persisted keys in a way that could lose old key material.
  Currently the service does not provide a way to recover older key material,
  but losing it is strictly avoided by the code.
* Persisted key material should always be encrypted.

[bibliography]
== Related Links

* https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki[BIP32:
  Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets]
* https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki[BIP39:
  Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys]
* https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki[BIP44:
  Multi-Account Hierarchy for Deterministic Wallets]
* https://w3c.github.io/webcrypto/[Web Cryptography API]
